                                                                             MISB ST 0107.5

 STANDARD
                                                                            21 October 2021
 KLV Metadata in Motion Imagery


1 Scope
This Standard defines the baseline requirements for all implementations of KLV within Motion
Imagery files and streams.

2 References
MISB references cited here-in reflect versions current to the publication date of a document. In
the event of a MISB document correction, the corrected document will have a single letter Minor
Version appended to the Major Version number per the MISB Document Development Process
[1]. For example, corrections to ST 0001.2, which has a Major Version of 2, result in a new
version titled ST 0001.2a, which includes a Minor Version of “a”. The MISB will not update the
referring document (this document) with the Minor Version number change. When acquiring any
MISB reference listed below from an NGA repository the latest version may be either a Major or
Minor Version.
[1] MISB Document Development Process 7.0, Feb 2020.
[2] SMPTE ST 336:2017 Data Encoding Protocol Using Key-Length-Value.
[3] MISB MISP-2022.1: Motion Imagery Handbook, Oct 2021.
[4] MISB ST 0601.17 UAS Datalink Local Set, Oct 2020.
[5] ITU-T Rec X.680 (02/21) Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Specification of basic
    notation.
[6] IEEE 754-2019 Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic.
[7] MISB ST 1201.5 Floating Point to Integer Mapping, Jun 2021.
[8] ISO/IEC 10646:2020 Information technology – Universal Coded Character Set (UCS).


3 Revision History
  Revision       Date                                 Summary of Changes
 ST 0107.5    10/21/2021      •   Revised Section 6.3.3.1 to allow 16-bit floats along with 32-
                                  bit & 64-bit floats
                              •   Added Req -20
                              •   Updated References [1], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]



21 October 2021            Motion Imagery Standards Board                                         1
                           ST 0107.5 KLV Metadata in Motion Imagery


4 Acronyms and Definitions
 BER              Basic Encoding Rules
 IEEE             Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
 ISO              International Organization for Standardization
 KLV              Key Length Value
 lsb              least significant bit
 MISB             Motion Imagery Standards Board
 MISP             Motion Imagery Standards Profile
 msb              most significant bit
 MSB              Most Significant Byte
 OID              Object IDentifier
 SMPTE            Society of Motion Pictures and Television Engineers
 ST               Standard
 ZLI              Zero-Length Item

5 Introduction
This Standard defines a baseline set of requirements applicable to all MISB KLV metadata
standards which promote interoperability amongst Motion Imagery systems, minimize
bandwidth in transmission, and lessen the storage requirements of Motion Imagery.

6 Baseline Requirements

6.1 Bit and Byte Order
For systems to understand each other’s data representations it is essential all metadata use the
same bit and byte order convention in the storage of the data. This does not directly apply to data
within a communication system, since these systems may change data order along a transmission
path. The assumption is a communications system delivers data with the same bit or byte order in
which it was received.
Computing systems order multiple bytes of data with a specific “endian-ness.” The “big-endian”
format in this Standard signifies the “big end” (most significant bit or byte value in the sequence)
is stored first. It is synonymous with the terms most significant bit (msb) first, or most significant
byte (MSB) first.
                                          Requirement(s)
ST 0107.2-01 Bit order shall be big-endian or msb.
ST 0107.2-02 Byte order shall be big-endian or MSB.


6.2 SMPTE KLV
The transmission of Motion Imagery data is typically limited by a fixed-bandwidth channel, so
reducing any overhead in the metadata allows more capacity for the Motion Imagery content.
KLV developed by the SMPTE is a bit-efficient data encoding format for representing metadata
(see [2]). The MISB standards define requirements which incur limits on the full SMPTE 336,

21 October 2021              Motion Imagery Standards Board                                         2
                           ST 0107.5 KLV Metadata in Motion Imagery

making the MISB standards a profile of the SMPTE standards. The Motion Imagery Handbook
[3] discusses various KLV constructs in use throughout MISB standards.
                                           Requirement
ST 0107.3-03 All Local Set KLV metadata shall be formatted in compliance with SMPTE ST 336.


6.3 KLV Local Sets
The most common construct in the MISB Standards is the KLV Local Set. A Local Set is a KLV
construct for encapsulating a list of Local Set items as a single block of data (in bytes). A Local
Set item is a Key-Length-Value triplet. The “Key” in a Local Set is represented as a “Tag,”
which only has meaning within the bounds of the Local Set in which it is defined. The Tag
indicates which item, of the list of items, the Value represents. It provides the identity of the
item, and via its defining document, provides the method to decode the Value into a software
data type. The Length defines the number of bytes used by the Value. Lengths are usually
positive numbers; however, a zero length is possible in unique cases. Values are the binary
representation describing a specific item. In the case of a zero Length, the Value is not a part of
the item (see MISB ST 0601 [4]). Please refer to the Motion Imagery Handbook for more details
on Local Sets.
One advantage of KLV is the ability to skip or ignore items which may not be known by a
consumer of the data. For example, suppose a new version of a Local Set introduces new tags
which an existing decoder does not understand. Instead of crashing, the decoder simply ignores
any item it does not understand – this makes a decoder “future-proof.” In such cases, the Length
specified by the Tag is used to skip the correct number of bytes to the next item.
                                           Requirement
ST 0107.3-04 Applications which decode MISB KLV Local Sets shall skip unknown Local Set
             values so as to not impact the decoding of known Local Set items within the same
             Local Set instance.


6.3.1 Tag Encoding
The Basic Encoding Rules (BER) for an Object Identifier (BER-OID) as defined in ASN.1 [5] is
the method selected for encoding a Local Set tag. The use of BER-OID for tags provides a means
to specify a tag number without the need to indicate the quantity of bytes used for the tag (i.e.,
the tag-length). BER-OID tags are one or more bytes linked together in chain fashion. In BER-
OID a zero in the Most Significant Bit (msb) position terminates the tag’s chain. For example,
when the msb is set to zero in the first byte, this forms a one-byte tag number ranging from 0x00
to 0x7F.
When the msb of the first byte is set to one, the second successive byte becomes part of the BER-
OID chain. In continued fashion, if the second byte’s msb is set to one, the next byte becomes
part of the chain. This pattern continues until the msb of a final byte in the chain is zero.
Together the seven Least Signification Bits (lsb) of each byte in the chain form the tag number.
The Motion Imagery Handbook provides further details on BER. Using BER-OID for the tags in
all MISB local sets enables efficient tag encoding and unlimited future growth.



21 October 2021             Motion Imagery Standards Board                                         3
                          ST 0107.5 KLV Metadata in Motion Imagery

To prevent BER-OID from including leading zeros, ASN.1 forbids the use of 0x80 in the first
byte of a BER-OID value.

6.3.2 Length Encoding
The Length of a Local Set item uses BER for both short and long form encoding of octets. This
encoding method provides the greatest degree of flexibility for variable length data contained
within a KLV packet. BER is an efficient encoding of a length; however, by either using the long
form for values less than 128, or by prepending a long form value with zero-byte values, BER
becomes less efficient. For example, encoding the length of two (2), a value less than 128, with
long form uses two bytes (0x8102) instead of the short form one-byte (0x02) length. Another
example is encoding the value 128 with padded zeros (0x8300 0080) instead of the optimized
value with two bytes (0x8180). The Motion Imagery Handbook provides information and
illustrations for implementing the short and long forms of BER encoding.
                                          Requirement
ST 0107.3-05 All instances of item Length fields within a MISB defined KLV Universal or Local Set
             shall be BER Short form or BER Long form encoded using the fewest possible bytes.


6.3.3 Value Encoding
When encoding individual numeric (i.e., floats and integers) or character items within a Local
Set, use the fewest number of bytes allowed. Local Set items may have a required or variable
“value-length.” Items with required value-lengths use the exact number of bytes specified by the
required Length. Items with variable value-length will adjust in size based on the Value and the
items may have maximum lengths defined. When encoding a Value do not exceed the maximum
limits. Reduce variable length items to their smallest length without losing their meaning or
precision.
                                         Requirement(s)
ST 0107.3-06 Where a MISB standard defines a numeric required Length for a Local Set item’s
             Value, the encoded Value shall match the number of bytes defined by the required
             Length.
ST 0107.3-07 Where a MISB standard defines a numeric maximum Length for a Local Set item’s
             Value, the encoded Value shall not exceed the number of bytes defined by the
             maximum Length.


6.3.3.1 Numeric Items
Numeric Items consist of Floating-Point Values, IMAP Floating Point Values, Signed Integer,
Unsigned Integers, BER-OID, and BER Values.
Items using the “float,” “float16,” “float32,” and “float64” types in the MISB Standards will use
the IEEE 754 [6] standard to encode their values. The IEEE 754 binary16 (2 bytes), binary32 (4
bytes) and binary64 (8 bytes) are the three types of Floating-Point Values in use by the MISB
Standards. However, other types of IEEE 754 are possible in future updates.
Items using the “IMAPA” or “IMAPB” types in the MISB Standards will use the methods in
MISB ST 1201 [7] to encode (or map) floating point values into an integer-based format. The

21 October 2021             Motion Imagery Standards Board                                      4
                           ST 0107.5 KLV Metadata in Motion Imagery

IMAP method save bandwidth on individual floating-point values by converting a floating-point
value into an integer using less bytes than the original floating-point value. The IMAP algorithm
uses the allowed value range (i.e., minimum and maximum values) and the desired precision to
map the value. With some values the precision is based on system requirements and can change
from system to system, or even packet to packet. To use IMAP efficiently it is important to use
the fewest number of bytes while maintaining the desired precision of the system.
Items using the “int” or “uint” prefix (e.g., int8, int16, uint8, etc.) types in the MISB Standards
will use big-endian integers to encode their values. Some “int” or “uint” values define variable
lengths that adjust based on their numeric value. With the variable length “int” or “uint” values,
use the fewest bytes to represent the Value; do not include leading zero (or sign extensions)
bytes.
Items using “ber-oid” types in the MISB standards use the ASN.1 [5] Basic Encoding Rules for
Object Identification (BER-OID) rules. The Motion Imagery Handbook discusses the BER-OID
encoding technique in detail with examples and figures. This technique adjusts the length based
on the numeric value and the rules prevent wasted bytes in the encoding.
Items using “ber” types in the MISB standards use the ASN.1 [5] Basic Encoding Rules for
Lengths rules. The Motion Imagery Handbook discusses the BER encoding technique in detail
with examples and figures. Section 6.3.2 above explains the possible inefficiencies that can occur
when using the BER technique.

                                          Requirement(s)
ST 0107.3-08 Where a MISB standard defines a Local Set item with a KLV format of, or prefixed
             with, “float,” the encoded Value shall use the IEEE 754 standard to encode the value.
ST 0107.5-20 Where a MISB standard defines a Local Set item with a KLV format of “float,” the
             encoded Value shall be of size binary16, binary32 or binary64.
ST 0107.3-09 Where a MISB standard defines a Local Set item with a KLV format of “IMAPA” or
             “IMAPB,” and the Local Set item allows variable length encoding, the encoded Value
             shall use the fewest number of bytes, while maintaining system precision.
ST 0107.3-10 Where a MISB standard defines a Local Set item with a KLV format of, or prefixed
             with, “uint” or “int,” and the Local Set item allows variable length encoding, the
             encoded value shall remove leading zero or leading sign extension bytes.
ST 0107.3-11 Where a MISB standard defines a Local Set item with a KLV format of “ber” and the
             item allows variable length encoding, the encoded Value shall use the fewest
             number of bytes.


6.3.3.2 String Items
Items with the type “utf8” are strings of characters based on the ISO/IEC 10646:2014 Universal
Character Set (UCS) [8] standard for interpretation, as discussed in the Motion Imagery
Handbook. Unless a Local Set item description states otherwise, all strings are variable length.
The Local Set item’s length determines the length of the string with the one exception of the
“empty string.”
The empty string uses a single null character (0x00) with no other characters to indicate the
string is blank. The length of the empty string within KLV is one (1), for the null character, but
the decoding software converts the empty string to the software language’s equivalent of an

21 October 2021              Motion Imagery Standards Board                                           5
                           ST 0107.5 KLV Metadata in Motion Imagery

empty string (e.g., Java interprets an empty string as a String of length zero). The empty string is
different than an “Unknown” string (see MISB ST 0601 [4]), where the string is undefined (e.g.,
Java interprets an Unknown string as a String variable set to “null”). A string item with a length
of zero (0) signifies an “Unknown” string.
Strings can easily consume a large amount of bandwidth; the recommended practice is to use the
fewest characters needed to provide the intended meaning. With exception of the single null
character for an empty string, or if an item definition allows it, do not use the characters in the
hex ranges (inclusive) of 0x00 through 0x08, 0x0B through 0x0C, 0x0E through 0x1F, and
character 0x7F. Furthermore, remove any leading or trailing null, tab, line feed, carriage return,
and space characters (0x00, 0x09, 0x0A, 0x0D, and 0x20, respectively) in the Value unless
specified by the defining document.
                                          Requirement(s)
ST 0107.3-12 Where a MISB standard defines a Local Set item with a KLV format of “utf8” and the
             Value is not the empty string, the encoded value shall have all leading and trailing,
             null (0x00), tab (0x09), line feed (0x0A), carriage return (0x0D), and space (0x20)
             characters removed, unless the item definition allows them.
ST 0107.3-13 Where a MISB standard defines a Local Set item with a KLV format of “utf8” and the
             Value is not the empty string, the encoded value shall have all characters in the hex
             ranges (inclusive) of 0x00 through 0x08, 0x0B, 0x0C, 0x0E through 0x1F, and
             character 0x7F removed, unless the item definition allows them.


6.3.4 Report-on-Change
Report-on-Change is a bandwidth conservation technique a MISB standard may employ. A
standard which uses Report-on-Change declares its use; if a standard does not declare its use,
Report-on-Change is not used within said standard. Report-on-Change is dependent on KLV
Packets which include a time value. For a standard where its KLV Packets do not include a time
value, the standard does not have sufficient information to support the Report-on-Change
technique.
Report-on-Change serves several functions in the delivery of metadata from sender to receiver:
   1. Reduces the bandwidth consumed by metadata by including metadata items only at the
      Minimum Refresh Period or when changes to their value occur.
   2. Signals to a receiver that a specific metadata item is no longer being transmitted.
The Motion Imagery Handbook describes the Report-on-Change technique. Receivers treat an
item as Unknown when the item does not update within a Metadata Refresh Period – defined in
the Motion Imagery Handbook with a default of a 30-second window of time.
Based on bandwidth, standards’ requirements, and system requirements, metadata producers
select which metadata items from the KLV metadata set are reportable. From the perspective of a
metadata producer, each reportable Local Set item can be in one of three states:
   1. Known–Changing
   2. Known–Static
   3. Unknown


21 October 2021              Motion Imagery Standards Board                                        6
                           ST 0107.5 KLV Metadata in Motion Imagery

It is possible for a Known-Changing or Known-Static item to become Unknown, in which case
the receiver stops using the last known value after the Metadata Refresh Period . If a metadata
producer needs to “shut-off” an item (i.e., make it immediately Unknown) the producer sends a
Zero-Length Item (ZLI) which is a Local Set item with no value (i.e., tag followed by a length of
zero, with no value). The receiver interprets a ZLI as the value becoming immediately Unknown.
The intended use of a ZLI comes only after a value has been in the Known state (either Known-
Changing or Known-Static).
KLV allows for hierarchies of metadata, where a Local Set (parent) may have an item which is
itself a Local Set (child). Unless a standard allows it, the use of ZLI for a child Local Set is
discouraged. Similarly, the use of ZLI for child Packs are likewise discouraged.
A Local Set may include both single-use or multi-use items (i.e., tags); the Local Set standard
identifies multi-use items. Single-use items only appear in a Local Set instance once (i.e., the
Local Set instance includes an item’s tag one time). Multi-use items allow the same item
multiple times but with different values (i.e., the Local Set instance has two (or more) items with
the same tag but different values). When using the same tag multiple times within a Local Set, it
is not possible to determine which of those tags the ZLI (in a subsequent packet) applies.
Therefore, ZLIs are not applicable to multi-use items.

                                         Requirement(s)
ST 0107.4-14    Where a standard implements Report-on-Change for reportable items, Known-
                Changing or Known-Static items shall be reported no less than once every Metadata
                Refresh Period.
ST 0107.4-15    Where a standard implements Report-on-Change, metadata items which have not
                been updated within a Metadata Refresh Period shall be considered Unknown.
ST 0107.4-16    Required or mandatory items of a Local Set shall always be reported with positive
                lengths (i.e., Zero-Length Items (ZLI) are not allowed for these items).
ST 0107.4-17    Where a Local Set item has a length of zero, consumers shall interpret the value of
                the item as "unknown.”
ST 0107.4-18    Where a standard implements Report-on-Change, the maximum value for the
                Metadata Refresh Period shall be 30 seconds.
ST 0107.4-19    Where a standard implements Report-on-Change, only single-use Local Set items
                within an instance shall be allowed to specify a Zero-Length Item (ZLI).



6.3.5 Metadata Distribution
Within a constrained bandwidth channel, shared by both Motion Imagery and metadata,
transmitting a large amount of metadata at one time can impact the received quality of the
Motion Imagery. To prevent this, the MISB recommends distributing the Known-Static metadata
items over a 30 second refresh period. For example, instead of sending item A, B and C every 30
seconds at time 00:00:00, send item A every 30 seconds starting at time 00:00:00; send item B
every thirty seconds starting at time 00:00:05 (five seconds later); send item C every thirty
seconds starting at time 00:00:10 (10 seconds after the first item); etc. This distributes the
metadata over time.


21 October 2021             Motion Imagery Standards Board                                        7
                           ST 0107.5 KLV Metadata in Motion Imagery

Further, some list items can be sent as individual list items (or small groups of items) distributed
over multiple packets instead of all at once. Metadata items which allow this are noted in the
“Details” section of the item description.




21 October 2021              Motion Imagery Standards Board                                        8
